system/doc/programming_examples/list_comprehensions.md, before:

<!--
%CopyrightBegin%

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Copyright Ericsson AB 2023-2025. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

%CopyrightEnd%
-->
# List Comprehensions

## Simple Examples

This section starts with a simple example, showing a generator and a filter:

```erlang
> [X || X <:- [1,2,a,3,4,b,5,6], X > 3].
[a,4,b,5,6]
```

This is read as follows: The list of X such that X is taken from the list
`[1,2,a,...]` and X is greater than 3.

The notation `X <:- [1,2,a,...]` is a generator and the expression `X > 3` is a
filter.

An additional filter, [`is_integer(X)`](`is_integer/1`), can be added to
restrict the result to integers:

```erlang
> [X || X <:- [1,2,a,3,4,b,5,6], is_integer(X), X > 3].
[4,5,6]
```

Generators can be combined in two ways. For example, the Cartesian product of
two lists can be written as follows:

```erlang
> [{X, Y} || X <:- [1,2,3], Y <:- [a,b]].
[{1,a},{1,b},{2,a},{2,b},{3,a},{3,b}]
```

Alternatively, two lists can be zipped together using a zip generator as
follows:

```erlang
> [{X, Y} || X <:- [1,2,3] && Y <:- [a,b,c]].
[{1,a},{2,b},{3,c}]
```

> #### Change {: .info }
>
> Strict generators are used by default in the examples. More details and
> comparisons can be found in [Strict and Relaxed Generators](#strict-and-relaxed-generators).

## Quick Sort

The well-known quick sort routine can be written as follows:

```erlang
sort([]) -> [];
sort([_] = L) -> L;
sort([Pivot|T]) ->
    sort([ X || X <:- T, X < Pivot]) ++
    [Pivot] ++
    sort([ X || X <:- T, X >= Pivot]).
```

The expression `[X || X <:- T, X < Pivot]` is the list of all elements in `T`
that are less than `Pivot`.

`[X || X <:- T, X >= Pivot]` is the list of all elements in `T` that are greater
than or equal to `Pivot`.

With the algorithm above, a list is sorted as follows:

- A list with zero or one element is trivially sorted.
- For lists with more than one element:
  1. The first element in the list is isolated as the pivot element.
  1. The remaining list is partitioned into two sublists, such that:
  - The first sublist contains all elements that are smaller than the pivot
    element.
  - The second sublist contains all elements that are greater than or equal to
    the pivot element.
  1. The sublists are recursively sorted by the same algorithm and the results
     are combined, resulting in a list consisting of:
  - All elements from the first sublist, that is all elements smaller than the
    pivot element, in sorted order.
  - The pivot element.
  - All elements from the second sublist, that is all elements greater than or
    equal to the pivot element, in sorted order.

> #### Note {: .info }
>
> While the sorting algorithm as shown above serves as a nice example to
> illustrate list comprehensions with filters, for real world use cases the
> `m:lists` module contains sorting functions that are implemented in a more
> efficient way.

## Permutations

The following example generates all permutations of the elements in a list:

```erlang
perms([]) -> [[]];
perms(L)  -> [[H|T] || H <:- L, T <:- perms(L--[H])].
```

This takes `H` from `L` in all possible ways. The result is the set of all lists
`[H|T]`, where `T` is the set of all possible permutations of `L`, with `H`
removed:

```erlang
> perms([b,u,g]).
[[b,u,g],[b,g,u],[u,b,g],[u,g,b],[g,b,u],[g,u,b]]
```

## Pythagorean Triplets

Pythagorean triplets are sets of integers `{A,B,C}` such that
`A**2 + B**2 = C**2`.

The function `pyth(N)` generates a list of all integers `{A,B,C}` such that
`A**2 + B**2 = C**2` and where the sum of the sides is equal to, or less than,
`N`:

```erlang
pyth(N) ->
    [ {A,B,C} ||
        A <:- lists:seq(1,N),
        B <:- lists:seq(1,N),
        C <:- lists:seq(1,N),
        A+B+C =< N,
        A*A+B*B == C*C
    ].
```

```erlang
> pyth(3).
[].
> pyth(11).
[].
> pyth(12).
[{3,4,5},{4,3,5}]
> pyth(50).
[{3,4,5},
 {4,3,5},
 {5,12,13},
 {6,8,10},
 {8,6,10},
 {8,15,17},
 {9,12,15},
 {12,5,13},
 {12,9,15},
 {12,16,20},
 {15,8,17},
 {16,12,20}]
```

The following code reduces the search space and is more efficient:

```erlang
pyth1(N) ->
   [{A,B,C} ||
       A <:- lists:seq(1,N-2),
       B <:- lists:seq(A+1,N-1),
       C <:- lists:seq(B+1,N),
       A+B+C =< N,
       A*A+B*B == C*C ].
```

## Simplifications With List Comprehensions

As an example, list comprehensions can be used to simplify some of the functions
in `lists.erl`:

```erlang
append(L)   ->  [X || L1 <:- L, X <:- L1].
map(Fun, L) -> [Fun(X) || X <:- L].
filter(Pred, L) -> [X || X <:- L, Pred(X)].
zip(L1, L2) -> [{X,Y} || X <:- L1 && Y <:- L2].
```

## Variable Bindings in List Comprehensions

The scope rules for variables that occur in list comprehensions are as follows:

- All variables that occur in a generator pattern are assumed to be "fresh"
  variables.
- Any variables that are defined before the list comprehension, and that are
  used in filters, have the values they had before the list comprehension.
- Variables cannot be exported from a list comprehension.
- Within a zip generator, binding of all variables happen at the same time.

As an example of these rules, suppose you want to write the function `select`,
which selects certain elements from a list of tuples. Suppose you write
`select(X, L) -> [Y || {X, Y} <- L].` with the intention of extracting all
tuples from `L`, where the first item is `X`.

Compiling this gives the following diagnostic:

```text
./FileName.erl:Line: Warning: variable 'X' shadowed in generate
```

This diagnostic warns that the variable `X` in the pattern is not the same as
the variable `X` that occurs in the function head.

Evaluating `select` gives the following result:

```erlang
> select(b,[{a,1},{b,2},{c,3},{b,7}]).
[1,2,3,7]
```

This is not the wanted result. To achieve the desired effect, `select` must be
written as follows:

```erlang
select(X, L) ->  [Y || {X1, Y} <- L, X == X1].
```

The generator now contains unbound variables and the test has been moved into
the filter.

This now works as expected:

```erlang
> select(b,[{a,1},{b,2},{c,3},{b,7}]).
[2,7]
```

Also note that a variable in a generator pattern will shadow a variable with the
same name bound in a previous generator pattern. For example:

```erlang
> [{X,Y} || X <- [1,2,3], X=Y <- [a,b,c]].
[{a,a},{b,b},{c,c},{a,a},{b,b},{c,c},{a,a},{b,b},{c,c}]
```

A consequence of the rules for importing variables into a list comprehensions is
that certain pattern matching operations must be moved into the filters and
cannot be written directly in the generators.

To illustrate this, do _not_ write as follows:

```erlang
f(...) ->
    Y = ...
    [ Expression || PatternInvolving Y  <- Expr, ...]
    ...
```

Instead, write as follows:

```erlang
f(...) ->
    Y = ...
    [ Expression || PatternInvolving Y1  <- Expr, Y == Y1, ...]
    ...
```

## Strict and Relaxed Generators

Strict and relaxed generators have different behaviors when the right-hand
side expression does not match the left-hand side pattern. A relaxed generator
ignores that term and continues on. A strict generator fails with an exception.

Their difference can be shown in the following example. The generator
expects a two-tuple pattern. If a relaxed generator is used, `b` will be
silently skipped. If a strict generator is used, an exception will be raised
when the pattern matching fails with `b`.

```
{_,_} <-  [{ok, a}, b]
{_,_} <:- [{ok, a}, b]
```

Semantically, strict or relaxed generators convey different intentions from
the programmer. Strict generators are used when unexpected elements in the
input data should not be tolerated. Any element not conforming to specific
patterns should immediately crash the comprehension, because the program may
not be prepared to handle it.

For example, the following comprehension is rewritten from one in the Erlang
linter. It extracts arities from all defined functions. All elements in the
list `DefinedFuns` are two-tuples, containing name and arity for functions.
If any of them differs from this pattern, it means that something has added
an invalid item into the list of defined functions. It is better for the linter
to crash in the comprehension than skipping the invalid item and continue
running. Using a strict generator here is correct, because the linter should
not hide the presence of an internal inconsistency.

```
[Arity || {_FunName, Arity} <:- DefinedFuns]
```

In contrast, relaxed generators are used when unexpected elements in the input
data should be _filtered out_. The programmer is aware that some elements
may not conform to specific patterns. Those elements can be safely excluded
from the comprehension result.

For example, the following comprehension is from a compiler module that
transforms normal Erlang code to Core Erlang. It finds all defined functions
from an abstract form, and output them in two-tuples, each containing name and
arity of a function. Not all forms are function declarations. All the forms
that are not function declarations should be ignored by this comprehensions.
Using a relaxed generator here is correct, because the programmer intends to
exclude all elements with other patterns.

```
[{Name,Arity} || {function,_,Name,Arity,_} <- Forms]
```

Strict and relaxed generators don't always have distinct use cases. When the
left-hand side pattern of a generator is a fresh variable, pattern matching
cannot fail. Using either strict or relaxed generators leads to the same
behavior. While the preference and use cases might be individual, it is
recommended to use strict generators when either can be used. Using strict
generators by default aligns with Erlang's "Let it crash" philosophy.

Commit message:

[EEP 78] Implement multi-valued comprehensions
Implement EEP 78 - Multi-valued comprehensions. This EEP proposes
enhancing the comprehension syntax to allow emitting multiple elements
in a single iteration of the comprehension loop - effectively enhancing
comprehensions to implement flatmap with a fixed number of elements.

An example of multi-valued comprehension:

````
[X + 1, X + 2, ... || X <- Xs]
````

system/doc/programming_examples/list_comprehensions.md, after:

<!--
%CopyrightBegin%

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Copyright Ericsson AB 2023-2025. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

%CopyrightEnd%
-->
# List Comprehensions

## Simple Examples

This section starts with a simple example, showing a generator and a filter:

```erlang
> [X || X <:- [1,2,a,3,4,b,5,6], X > 3].
[a,4,b,5,6]
```

This is read as follows: The list of X such that X is taken from the list
`[1,2,a,...]` and X is greater than 3.

The notation `X <:- [1,2,a,...]` is a generator and the expression `X > 3` is a
filter.

An additional filter, [`is_integer(X)`](`is_integer/1`), can be added to
restrict the result to integers:

```erlang
> [X || X <:- [1,2,a,3,4,b,5,6], is_integer(X), X > 3].
[4,5,6]
```

Generators can be combined in two ways. For example, the Cartesian product of
two lists can be written as follows:

```erlang
> [{X, Y} || X <:- [1,2,3], Y <:- [a,b]].
[{1,a},{1,b},{2,a},{2,b},{3,a},{3,b}]
```

Alternatively, two lists can be zipped together using a zip generator as
follows:

```erlang
> [{X, Y} || X <:- [1,2,3] && Y <:- [a,b,c]].
[{1,a},{2,b},{3,c}]
```

Finally, multiple elements can be emitted by the list comprehension in each iteration:
```
> [X, X + 100 || X <:- [1, 2, 3]].
[1,101,2,102,3,103]
```

> #### Change {: .info }
>
> Strict generators are used by default in the examples. More details and
> comparisons can be found in [Strict and Relaxed Generators](#strict-and-relaxed-generators).

## Quick Sort

The well-known quick sort routine can be written as follows:

```erlang
sort([]) -> [];
sort([_] = L) -> L;
sort([Pivot|T]) ->
    sort([ X || X <:- T, X < Pivot]) ++
    [Pivot] ++
    sort([ X || X <:- T, X >= Pivot]).
```

The expression `[X || X <:- T, X < Pivot]` is the list of all elements in `T`
that are less than `Pivot`.

`[X || X <:- T, X >= Pivot]` is the list of all elements in `T` that are greater
than or equal to `Pivot`.

With the algorithm above, a list is sorted as follows:

- A list with zero or one element is trivially sorted.
- For lists with more than one element:
  1. The first element in the list is isolated as the pivot element.
  1. The remaining list is partitioned into two sublists, such that:
  - The first sublist contains all elements that are smaller than the pivot
    element.
  - The second sublist contains all elements that are greater than or equal to
    the pivot element.
  1. The sublists are recursively sorted by the same algorithm and the results
     are combined, resulting in a list consisting of:
  - All elements from the first sublist, that is all elements smaller than the
    pivot element, in sorted order.
  - The pivot element.
  - All elements from the second sublist, that is all elements greater than or
    equal to the pivot element, in sorted order.

> #### Note {: .info }
>
> While the sorting algorithm as shown above serves as a nice example to
> illustrate list comprehensions with filters, for real world use cases the
> `m:lists` module contains sorting functions that are implemented in a more
> efficient way.

## Permutations

The following example generates all permutations of the elements in a list:

```erlang
perms([]) -> [[]];
perms(L)  -> [[H|T] || H <:- L, T <:- perms(L--[H])].
```

This takes `H` from `L` in all possible ways. The result is the set of all lists
`[H|T]`, where `T` is the set of all possible permutations of `L`, with `H`
removed:

```erlang
> perms([b,u,g]).
[[b,u,g],[b,g,u],[u,b,g],[u,g,b],[g,b,u],[g,u,b]]
```

## Pythagorean Triplets

Pythagorean triplets are sets of integers `{A,B,C}` such that
`A**2 + B**2 = C**2`.

The function `pyth(N)` generates a list of all integers `{A,B,C}` such that
`A**2 + B**2 = C**2` and where the sum of the sides is equal to, or less than,
`N`:

```erlang
pyth(N) ->
    [ {A,B,C} ||
        A <:- lists:seq(1,N),
        B <:- lists:seq(1,N),
        C <:- lists:seq(1,N),
        A+B+C =< N,
        A*A+B*B == C*C
    ].
```

```erlang
> pyth(3).
[].
> pyth(11).
[].
> pyth(12).
[{3,4,5},{4,3,5}]
> pyth(50).
[{3,4,5},
 {4,3,5},
 {5,12,13},
 {6,8,10},
 {8,6,10},
 {8,15,17},
 {9,12,15},
 {12,5,13},
 {12,9,15},
 {12,16,20},
 {15,8,17},
 {16,12,20}]
```

The following code reduces the search space and is more efficient:

```erlang
pyth1(N) ->
   [{A,B,C} ||
       A <:- lists:seq(1,N-2),
       B <:- lists:seq(A+1,N-1),
       C <:- lists:seq(B+1,N),
       A+B+C =< N,
       A*A+B*B == C*C ].
```

## Simplifications With List Comprehensions

As an example, list comprehensions can be used to simplify some of the functions
in `lists.erl`:

```erlang
append(L)   ->  [X || L1 <:- L, X <:- L1].
map(Fun, L) -> [Fun(X) || X <:- L].
filter(Pred, L) -> [X || X <:- L, Pred(X)].
zip(L1, L2) -> [{X,Y} || X <:- L1 && Y <:- L2].
```

## Variable Bindings in List Comprehensions

The scope rules for variables that occur in list comprehensions are as follows:

- All variables that occur in a generator pattern are assumed to be "fresh"
  variables.
- Any variables that are defined before the list comprehension, and that are
  used in filters, have the values they had before the list comprehension.
- Variables cannot be exported from a list comprehension.
- Within a zip generator, binding of all variables happen at the same time.

As an example of these rules, suppose you want to write the function `select`,
which selects certain elements from a list of tuples. Suppose you write
`select(X, L) -> [Y || {X, Y} <- L].` with the intention of extracting all
tuples from `L`, where the first item is `X`.

Compiling this gives the following diagnostic:

```text
./FileName.erl:Line: Warning: variable 'X' shadowed in generate
```

This diagnostic warns that the variable `X` in the pattern is not the same as
the variable `X` that occurs in the function head.

Evaluating `select` gives the following result:

```erlang
> select(b,[{a,1},{b,2},{c,3},{b,7}]).
[1,2,3,7]
```

This is not the wanted result. To achieve the desired effect, `select` must be
written as follows:

```erlang
select(X, L) ->  [Y || {X1, Y} <- L, X == X1].
```

The generator now contains unbound variables and the test has been moved into
the filter.

This now works as expected:

```erlang
> select(b,[{a,1},{b,2},{c,3},{b,7}]).
[2,7]
```

Also note that a variable in a generator pattern will shadow a variable with the
same name bound in a previous generator pattern. For example:

```erlang
> [{X,Y} || X <- [1,2,3], X=Y <- [a,b,c]].
[{a,a},{b,b},{c,c},{a,a},{b,b},{c,c},{a,a},{b,b},{c,c}]
```

A consequence of the rules for importing variables into a list comprehensions is
that certain pattern matching operations must be moved into the filters and
cannot be written directly in the generators.

To illustrate this, do _not_ write as follows:

```erlang
f(...) ->
    Y = ...
    [ Expression || PatternInvolving Y  <- Expr, ...]
    ...
```

Instead, write as follows:

```erlang
f(...) ->
    Y = ...
    [ Expression || PatternInvolving Y1  <- Expr, Y == Y1, ...]
    ...
```

## Strict and Relaxed Generators

Strict and relaxed generators have different behaviors when the right-hand
side expression does not match the left-hand side pattern. A relaxed generator
ignores that term and continues on. A strict generator fails with an exception.

Their difference can be shown in the following example. The generator
expects a two-tuple pattern. If a relaxed generator is used, `b` will be
silently skipped. If a strict generator is used, an exception will be raised
when the pattern matching fails with `b`.

```
{_,_} <-  [{ok, a}, b]
{_,_} <:- [{ok, a}, b]
```

Semantically, strict or relaxed generators convey different intentions from
the programmer. Strict generators are used when unexpected elements in the
input data should not be tolerated. Any element not conforming to specific
patterns should immediately crash the comprehension, because the program may
not be prepared to handle it.

For example, the following comprehension is rewritten from one in the Erlang
linter. It extracts arities from all defined functions. All elements in the
list `DefinedFuns` are two-tuples, containing name and arity for functions.
If any of them differs from this pattern, it means that something has added
an invalid item into the list of defined functions. It is better for the linter
to crash in the comprehension than skipping the invalid item and continue
running. Using a strict generator here is correct, because the linter should
not hide the presence of an internal inconsistency.

```
[Arity || {_FunName, Arity} <:- DefinedFuns]
```

In contrast, relaxed generators are used when unexpected elements in the input
data should be _filtered out_. The programmer is aware that some elements
may not conform to specific patterns. Those elements can be safely excluded
from the comprehension result.

For example, the following comprehension is from a compiler module that
transforms normal Erlang code to Core Erlang. It finds all defined functions
from an abstract form, and output them in two-tuples, each containing name and
arity of a function. Not all forms are function declarations. All the forms
that are not function declarations should be ignored by this comprehensions.
Using a relaxed generator here is correct, because the programmer intends to
exclude all elements with other patterns.

```
[{Name,Arity} || {function,_,Name,Arity,_} <- Forms]
```

Strict and relaxed generators don't always have distinct use cases. When the
left-hand side pattern of a generator is a fresh variable, pattern matching
cannot fail. Using either strict or relaxed generators leads to the same
behavior. While the preference and use cases might be individual, it is
recommended to use strict generators when either can be used. Using strict
generators by default aligns with Erlang's "Let it crash" philosophy.
