lib/diameter/doc/references/diameterc_cmd.md, before:

<!--
%CopyrightBegin%

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Copyright Ericsson AB 2023-2025. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

%CopyrightEnd%
-->
# diameterc

Compile a diameter dictionary to Erlang source.

## Synopsis

```
diameterc [<options>] <file>
```

## Description

The diameterc utility is used to compile a diameter
[dictionary file](diameter_dict.md) into Erlang source. The resulting source
implements the interface diameter required to encode and decode the dictionary's
messages and AVPs.

The module `m:diameter_make` provides an alternate compilation interface.

# USAGE

Compile a single dictionary file to Erlang
source. Valid options are as follows.

- **\-i <dir>** - Prepend the specified directory to the code path. Use to
  point at beam files compiled from inherited dictionaries,
  `[@inherits](diameter_dict.md#inherits)` in a dictionary file creating a
  beam dependency, not an erl/hrl dependency.

  Multiple `-i` options can be specified.

- **\-o <dir>** - Write generated source to the specified directory. Defaults
  to the current working directory.

- **\-E** - Suppress `.erl` file generation.

- **\-H** - Suppress `.hrl` file generation.

- **\--name <name>** - Name the output module.

- **\--prefix <prefix>** - Transform the input dictionary before compilation,
  setting `[@name](diameter_dict.md#name)` or
  `[@prefix](diameter_dict.md#prefix)` to the specified string.

- **\--inherits <arg>** - Transform the input dictionary before compilation,
  appending `[@inherits](diameter_dict.md#inherits)` of the specified string.

  Two forms of `--inherits` have special meaning:

  ```text
  --inherits -
  --inherits Prev/Mod
  ```

  The first has the effect of clearing any previous inherits, the second of
  replacing a previous inherits of `Prev` to one of `Mod`. This allows the
  semantics of the input dictionary to be changed without modifying the file
  itself.

  Multiple `--inherits` options can be specified.

# EXIT STATUS

Returns 0 on success, non-zero on failure.

# SEE ALSO

`m:diameter_make`, [diameter_dict(4)](diameter_dict.md)

Commit message:

Add documentation about indirect-inherits option

lib/diameter/doc/references/diameterc_cmd.md, after:

<!--
%CopyrightBegin%

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Copyright Ericsson AB 2023-2025. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

%CopyrightEnd%
-->
# diameterc

Compile a diameter dictionary to Erlang source.

## Synopsis

```
diameterc [<options>] <file>
```

## Description

The diameterc utility is used to compile a diameter
[dictionary file](diameter_dict.md) into Erlang source. The resulting source
implements the interface diameter required to encode and decode the dictionary's
messages and AVPs.

The module `m:diameter_make` provides an alternate compilation interface.

# USAGE

Compile a single dictionary file to Erlang
source. Valid options are as follows.

- **\-i <dir>** - Prepend the specified directory to the code path. Use to
  point at beam files compiled from inherited dictionaries,
  [@inherits](diameter_dict.md#inherits) in a dictionary file creating a
  beam dependency, not an erl/hrl dependency.

  Multiple `-i` options can be specified.

- **\-o <dir>** - Write generated source to the specified directory. Defaults
  to the current working directory.

- **\-E** - Suppress `.erl` file generation.

- **\-H** - Suppress `.hrl` file generation.

- **\--name <name>** - Name the output module.

- **\--prefix <prefix>** - Transform the input dictionary before compilation,
  setting [@name](diameter_dict.md#name) or
  [@prefix](diameter_dict.md#prefix) to the specified string.

- **\--inherits <arg>** - Transform the input dictionary before compilation,
  appending [@inherits](diameter_dict.md#inherits) of the specified string.

  Two forms of `--inherits` have special meaning:

  ```text
  --inherits -
  --inherits Prev/Mod
  ```

  The first has the effect of clearing any previous inherits, the second of
  replacing a previous inherits of `Prev` to one of `Mod`. This allows the
  semantics of the input dictionary to be changed without modifying the file
  itself.

  Multiple `--inherits` options can be specified.

- **\--indirect-inherits** - Enables indirect inherits feature, see more
  [here](`diameter_make:codec/2`).

# EXIT STATUS

Returns 0 on success, non-zero on failure.

# SEE ALSO

`m:diameter_make`, [diameter_dict(4)](diameter_dict.md)
