
guard_warnings.erl:100: Guard test not
         ('true') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:102: Guard test 
          X :: 'true' =:= 
          'false' can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:104: Guard test 
          X :: 'true' == 
          'false' can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:106: Guard test 
          X :: 'true' =/= 
          'true' can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:12: Guard test 
          X :: 'true' =:= 
          'false' can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:14: Guard test 
          X :: 'false' =:= 
          'true' can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:16: Guard test not
         (X :: 'true') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:18: Guard test and
         ('true',
          X :: none()) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:20: Guard test not
         (X :: 'true') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:22: Guard test and
         ('true',
          X :: none()) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:28: Guard test not(not
         (X :: 'false')) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:30: Guard test not(or
         ('false',
          X :: none())) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:32: Guard test not(not
         (X :: 'false')) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:34: Guard test not(or
         ('false',
          X :: none())) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:36: Guard test and
         ('true',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:38: Guard test and
         ('false',
          any()) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:40: Guard test and
         (X :: 'true',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:42: Guard test and
         ('false',
          X :: any()) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:44: Guard test and
         (X :: 'true',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:46: Guard test and
         ('false',
          X :: any()) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:48: Guard test not(or
         ('true',
          any())) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:50: Guard test not(or
         ('false',
          'true')) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:52: Guard test not(or
         ('true',
          X :: any())) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:54: Guard test not(or
         (X :: 'false',
          'true')) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:56: Guard test not(or
         ('true',
          X :: any())) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:58: Guard test not(or
         (X :: 'false',
          'true')) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:60: Guard test and
         ('false',
          any()) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:62: Guard test and
         ('true',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:64: Guard test and
         ('false',
          X :: any()) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:66: Guard test and
         (X :: 'true',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:68: Guard test and
         ('false',
          X :: any()) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:70: Guard test and
         (X :: 'true',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:72: Guard test and
         ('false',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:74: Guard test and
         ('false',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:76: Guard test not(and
         ('true',
          'true')) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:78: Guard test and
         ('false',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:80: Guard test not(and
         ('true',
          'true')) can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:82: Guard test or
         ('false',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:84: Guard test or
         ('false',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:86: Guard test or
         ('false',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:88: Guard test or
         ('false',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:90: Guard test or
         ('false',
          'false') can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:92: Guard test 
          'true' =:= 
          'false' can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:94: Guard test 
          'true' == 
          'false' can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:96: Guard test 
          'true' =:= 
          'false' can never succeed
guard_warnings.erl:98: Guard test not(
          'true' == 
          'true') can never succeed
